
THE First Book proposes, first in brief, the whole subject, man's disobedience, and the loss thereupon of Paradise, 
wherein he was placed; then touches tho prime c:iuse of his fall, the Serpent, or rather Siitnn in the Serpent; 
who, revolting from God, and drawing to his side many legiona of angels, was, by the command of God, 
driven out of Heaven, with all his crew, into the great deep. Which action passtd over, the Poem hastuns 
into the midst of things, presenting Satan with his utgcls now fulling into Hell, described here, not in the 
cenlre.for Heaven and Earth may be supposed i.syet not made, certainly not yet accursed, but in a place of utter 
darkness, fitliest called Chaos. Hire Satan, wiih his angels, lying on the burning lake, thunderstruck and 
astonished, after a certain space recovers, as fiom confusion, calls up to him who next in order and dignity 
lay by him; they confer of their miserabl. fall; Satan : wakens all his legions, who lay till then in the same 
manner confounded. They rise; I heir numbers; array of battle; their chief leaders named, according to the 
idols known afterward in Canaan and the countries adjoining. To these Satan directs his speech, comforts 
them with hope yet of regaining Heaven, but Idle them lastly of a new work', and a new kind of rreatuie 
to be created, according to an ancient prophecy, or report in Heaven; for, that angels were long before this 
visiblo creation, was the opinion of many ancient fathers. To find out the truth of this prophecy, and what 
to determine thereon, he refers to a full council. What his associates thence attempt. Pandemonium, the 
palace of S.;tau, rises, suddenly built out of the deep: the infernal peers there sit in council. 



BOOK II. \j 



TIIE consultation begun, Satan debates whether another battle be to be hazarded for the recovery of lic:.ven 
Some advise it, others dissuade: a third proposal is preferred, mentioned before by S.itan, to search the truth 
of that prophecy or tradition in heaven concerning another world, and another kind of creature, equal or 
not much inferior to themselves, abcut this time to be created. Their doubt who shall be sent on this diffi- 
cult search; Satan, their chief, undertakes alone the voyage, is honored and applauded. The council thus 
ended, the rest betake them several ways, and to several employments, as their inclinations lead them, to en- 
tertain the time till Satan return. He passes on his journey to hell gates; finds them shut, and who sat 
there to guard them; by whom at length they are opened, and discover to him the great gulf between hell 
and heaven ; with what difficulty hp passes tbn ugh directed by Chaos, the power of that place, to the sight 
of this new world which he sought 20 



BOOK III. 

), siting on His throne, sees Satan flying towards this world, then newly created : shows him to the Son who 

H at His right h-ind : foretells the success of Satan in perverting mankind ; clears His on a justice anil wis- 

dom from all imputation, having created man free, and able enough to have withstood his tciuptcr; jet de- 



iii 



JV CONTENTS. 

clarcs His purpose of grace towards him, in regard he fell not of his own muliec, as did Satan, but by him 
seduced. The Bon of God renders praise to His Father for the manifestation of His gracious purpose to- 
wards m :n ; but God again declares that grace cannot bo extended towards r.iau without tlic satisfaction of 
Divine justice. Man hath offended the majesty of God by aspiring to Godhead, and, therefore, with his 
progeny, devoted to death, must die, unless some one can be found suflicieut to answer for his offence, and 
undergo his punishment. The Son of God freely offers himself a ransom for uiau : the Father accepts Him, 
ordains His incarnation, pronounces His exaltation above all names in heaven and earth; commands all tho 
angels to adore Him. They obey, and by hymning to their harps in full choir, celebrate the Father and the 
Son. Meanwhile, Satan alights upon the bare convex of this world's outermost orb; where wandering, he 
first finds a place, since called the Limbo of Vanity: what persons and things fly up thither: thence comes to 
the gates of heaven, described ascending by stairs, and the waters above the firmament that flow about it: 
his passage theuco to the orb of the sun; he finds there Uriel, the regent of that orb, but first changes him- 
self into the shape of a meaner angel; and, pretending a zealous desire to behold the new creation, and man, 
whom God had placed there, inquires of him tho place of his habitation, and is directed: alights fi:st en 
Mount Niphates 5' 



BOOK IV. 

SATAN, now in prospect of Eden, and nigh the place where he must now attempt the bold enterprise which he 
undertook alone against God and man, falls into many doubts with himself, and many passions, fear, envy, 
and despair; but at length confirms himself in evil, journeys on to Paradise, whose outward prospect and 
situation is described; overleaps the bounds; sits in the shape of a cormorant on the tree of life, as the high- 
est in the garden, to look about him. The garden described; Satan's first sight of Adam and Eve; his won- 
der at their excellent form and happy state, but with resolution to work their fall; overhears their discourse, 
thence gathers that the tree of knowledge was forbidden them to eat of, under penalty of death ; anJ thereon 
intends to found his temptation, by seducing them to transgress; then leaves them awhile to know farther of 
their state by some other means. Meanwhile, Uriel, descending on a sunbeam, warns Gabriel, who had in 
charge the gate of Paradise, that some evil spirit had escaped the deep, and passed at noon by his sphere, in 
the shape of a good angel, down to Paradise, discovered after by his furious gestures in the mount. Ga- 
briel promises to find him ere morning. Night coining on, Adam and Eve discourse of going to their rest: 
their bower described; their evening worship. Gabriel, drawing forth his bands of night-watch to walk the 
rounds of Paradise, appoints two strong angels to Adam's bower, lest the evil spirit should be there doing 
ome harm to Adam or Eve sleeping; there they find him at the ear of Eve, tempting her in a dream, and 
bring him, though unwilling, to Gabriel; by whom questioned, b- scornfully answers; prepares resistance; 
but, hindered by a sign from heaven, flies out of Paradise 7-j 



BOOK V. 

Mor.wiNO approached. Eve relates to Adams her troublesome dream; he likes it not, yet comforts her; they come 
forth to their day labors; their morning hymn at the door of their bower. God, to render man inexcusable, 
sends Raphael to admonish him of his obedience, of his free estate, of his enemy near at hand, who he is, 
and why his enemy, and whatever else may avail Adam to know. Raphael comes down to Paradise ; his appear- 
ance described ; his coming discerned by Adam afar off, sitting at the door of his bower; he goes out to meet 
him, brings him to his lodge, entertains him with the choicest fruits of Paradise, got together by Eve; their 
discourse at table; Rapahel performs his messgage, minds Adam of his state and of his enemy; relates, at 
Adam's request, who that enemy is, and how he came to be so, beginning from the first revolt in heaven, and 
the occasion thereof; how he drew his legions after him to the parts of the north, and there inched them to 
rebel with him, persuading all but only Abdiel, a seraph, who in argument dissuades and opposes him, then 
forsakes him 



BOOK VI. 

RAPHAEL continues to relate how Michael and Gabriel were sent forth to battle against Satan and bis angels. The 

described : Satan and his powers retire under night: he calls a council ; invents devilish engines, 

lecond day's fight, put Michael and his angels to some disorder; but they at length pulling up 

" OV( - rw !"l" Hi the force and ma.-hines of Sal.-m : set the tumult not so cudh)", God, on the third 

1 In Son, for whom He haa reserved the glory of that victory; He, in the power of His 



CONTENTS. V 

Fatlter, coming to the place, and causing all his legions to stand still on either side, with his chariot nnd 
thunder driving into the midst of his enemies, pursues them, unable to resist, towards the wall of heaven; 
which opening, they leap down with horror and confusion into the place of punishment prepared for them 
in the deep: Messiah returns with triumph to his Father .......... 130 



BOOK VII. 

RAPHAEL, at the request of Adam, relates how and wherefore this world was first creatad ; that God, after the 
expelling of Satan and his angels out of he iven, declared His pleasure I o create another world, and other 
creatures to dwell therein; sends His Son with glory, and attendance of angels, to perform the work of cre- 
ation in six days: the angels celebrate with hymns the performance thereof, and His re-ascension into 
Heaven .ICO 



BOOK VIII. 

ADAM inquires concerning celestial motions; is doubtfully answered, and exhorted to search rather things more 
worthy of knowledge; Adam assi-nts; and, still desirous to detain K-iphael, relates to him what he remem- 
bered since his own creation; his placing hi Paradise; his talk with God concerning solitude and fit society; 
his first meeting and nuptials with Eve; his discourse with the angel thereupon, who, after admonitions re- 
peated, departs ........... ...... 



BOOK IX. 

SATAN, having compassed the earth, with meditated guile returns, as a inist, by night, into Paradise; enters into 
the serpent sleeping. Adam and Eve in. the morning go forth to their labors, which Eve proposes tod. vide in 
several places, each laboring apart; Adam consents not, alleging the danger lest that enemy of whom they 
were forewarned, should attempt her, found ^alone: Eve, loth to be thought not circumspect or firm enough, 
urges her going n part, the rather desirous to make trial of her strength ; Adam at last yields; the serpent 
finds her alone: his subtle approach, first g.izing; then speaking; with much flattery extolling Eve above all 
other creatures. Eve, wondering to hear the serpent speak, asks how he attained to human speech, and such 
understanding, not till now; the serpent answers that, by tasting of a certain tree in the garden, he attained 
both to speech and reason, till then void of both. Eve requires him to bring her to that tree, and finds it 
to be the tree of knowledge, forbidden: the serpent, now grown holder, with many wiles and arguments in- 
duces her at length to cat: she, pleased with the taste, deliberates awhile whether to impart thereof to Adam 
or not; at last brings him of the fruit: relates what persuaded her to eat thereof. Adam, at first amazed, but 
perceiving her lost, resolves, through vehemence of love to perish with her; and, extenuating the trespass, 
eats also of the fruit : the effects thereof in them both ; they seek to cover their nakedness ; then fall to vari- 
ance and accusation of one another . . ?,0l 



BOOK X. 

MAN'S transgression known, the guardian angels forsake Paradise, and return up to heaven to approve their vig- 
ilance, and are approved ; God declaring that the entrance of Satan could not be by them prevented. He 
sends His Sou to judge tlie transgressors; who descends, and gives sentence accordingly ; then, in pity, clothes 
them both, and re-ascends. Sin and Death, sitting till then at the gates of hell, by wondrous sympathy 
feeling the success of Satan in this new world, and the sin by man there committed, resolve to sit no longer 
confined in hell, but to follow Satan, their sire, up to the place of man. To make the way easier from hell 
to this world to and fro, they puve a broad highway or bridge over Chaos, accordingto the track that Satan 
first made; theu, preparing for earth, they meet him, proud of his success, returning to hell ; their mutual 
gratulation. Satan arrivesat Pandemonium; in full assembly relates, with boasting, his success against man; 
instead of applause is entertained with a general hiss by all his audience, transformed, with himself also, 
suddenly into serpents, according to his doom given in Paradise; then, deluded with a show of the forbid- 
den tree springing up before them, greedily reaching to take of the fruit, chew dust and bitter ashes. The 
proceedings of Sin and Death ; God foretells the nual victory of His Son over them, and the renewing of all things ; 






VJ CONTENTS. 

but, for the present commands His angels to make several alterations in the heavens and elements. Adam 
moie and more pert-civil],; his fallen condition, heavily bewails, rejects the condoleinent of Eve; she persists, 
and at length appeases him: then, to evade the curse likely to fall on their offspring, proposes to Adam vio- 
lent ways, which he approves not; but conceiving better hope, puts h'jr in mind of the late promise made 
them, that her seed should be revenged on the serpent; and exhorts her, with him, to seek peace of the of- 
fended Deity, by repentance and supplication 236 



BOOK XI. 

THE Son of God presents to His Father the prayers of our first parents now repenting, and intercedes for ihem: 
God accepts them, but declares that they must no longer abide in Paradise; sends Michael with a band of 
cherubim to dispossess them ; but first to reveal to Axlam future things': Michael's coming down. Adam 
shows to Eve certain ominous signs : he discerns Michael's approach ; goes out to meet him: the angel de- 
nounces their departure. Eve's lamentation. Adam pleads, but submits: the angel leads him up to a high 
hill; sets before him in vision what shall happen till the flood 268 



BOOK XII. 

THE Angel Michael continues, from the flood, to relate what shall succeed ; then in the mention of Abraham, 
comes by degrees to explain who that seed of the woman shall be which was promised Adam and Eve in the 
fall: His incarnation, death, resurrection, and ascension; the state of the Church till his second coining. 
Adam, greatly satisfied and reconverted by these relations and promises, descends the hill with Michael; 
wakens Eve, who all this while had slept, but with gentle dreams composed to quietness of mind and sub- 
mission. Michael, in either hand leads them out of Paradise, the fiery sword waving behind them, acd the 
cherubim taking their stations to guard the place 2Sta 



THE LIFE OF JOHN MILTON. 



TJTARLY in the reign of Elizabeth, there dwelt at Ilolton, in Oxfordshire, or near to it, :i sub- 
staniM yeoman, named Milton. An ancestor of this person, it was said, had been a man of 
some position among the gentry in those parts, but having taken the losing side during the Wars 
of the Koses, had been reduced to much lower circumstances. The Milton we have mentioned, 
however, could send his son, John Milton, to Oxford for his education. Tlic father adhered to the 
creed which prevailed before the Information ; the son, while a student at Christchurch, renounced 
the faith of his forefathers, and avowed himself a Protestant; whereupon his father disinherited 
and disowned him. 1 

But the younger Milton, though he became, in this manner, virtually fatherless, does not tip. 
pear to have been disheartened. Leaving Oxford, we find him, some years later, in London, where 
he has so made his way through a scrivener's or, as we should now say, an attorney's ollice, as 
to have become himself a scrivener. About the year 1600 lie married. If we credit Philips, the 
grandson of the now prosperous citizen, his wife was "of the family of the Gastons, derived origi- 
nally from Wales;" and if so, John Milton, the poet, as born of this marriage, must have had, in 
common with Shakespeare, a dash of Celtic blood in his veins, and might have owed something, in 
his higher temperament, to the fervent and imaginative genius of a people whom he describes as 
"an ancient and haughty race," and with whose ancient and beautiful fictions he never ceased to 
be enamored. But Antony Wood says, on the authority of Aubrey, who kuew the family, that 
the mother of the poet was "Sarah, of the aucient family of the Bradshaws." Wo incline to think, 
however, that Philips, though not so safe a witness generally as Aubrey, was not likely to have 
been in error on so familiar a point of family history, especially when committing himself to the 
writing of a life of Milton. Mrs. Philips, the sister of the poet, must surely have known the 
maiden name of her own mother. It may be that Philips and Aubrey are both right. The mother 
of Milton's mother may have been a Bradshaw married to a Caston; and if so, the relation of the 
Miltons to the Bradshaws would not have been forgotten. It is difficult to imagine that either 
Philips or Aubrey could have expressed themselves so positively in this matter without warrant; 
and, in this view, we are not obliged to suppose that they really did so. Philips, always a Iloyal- 
ist, may not have cared to give prominence to the name of Bradshaw, and Aubrey may have had a 
feeling prompting him the other way. Down to the time of this marriage, the home of the Brad- 
sliaws had been almost confined to Lancashire and Cheshire, and in those counties intermarriages 
ivith the Welsh was by no means uncommon.* 

Six children were the offspring of this marriage, three of whom died in infancy. John, the 
poet, was one of the remaining three, and was born in I .read Street, London, September 9th, 1608. 



1 Aubrey's Lines. Philips' Life of Millv. * Masson's Life of Milton. 

vii 



viii THE LIKK OF JOHN MILTON. 

Ho grew up with a sister some years older than liimself, and with a brother seven years younger. 
The home of this family during Milton's early years was in the heart of the city Bread Street 
being a street branching off from Cheapside. The house was distinguished from the rest by the 
sign of the Spread Eagle placed upon it such signs being to houses in that day, especially to 
houses of any kind of business what numbers are at present. Of the Bread Street of Milton's 
youth not a vestige remains; it was swept away by the great fire in 1666. But the new houses 
were built upon the old sites, so that the street is perpetuated. As we pass along, it is left to the 
imagination to displace all the visible erections, and to recall the lofty buildings of wood and plas- 
ter, carved and colored in quaint fashions, and projecting storey above storey, until small space, 
perhaps, is left for a strip of blue or misty sky to be seen above. Citizens, us a rule, then lived in 
the city. The lower parts of those somewhat heavy and gloomy but picturesque structures were 
assigned to business; the upper floors were the homes of the citizen families, even in the case, for 
the greater part, of the most wealthy. 

Young Milton would know Bread Street as it was, the "Cheap" as it was. He would make his 
excursions through Paternoster Row, long before the booksellers had dropped, one by one, from 
their old quarters in St. Paul's Churchyard, into that tunnel of a thoroughfare, and were to make 
make it memorable as the mart of publishers. St. Paul's itself, too the old Gothic building, we 
mean, large enough to have enclosed the present within its walls, and with room to spare must 
soon have become familiar to the future poet. He must often have trod its promenade along its 
great centre, where crowds of well-dressed idlers might be daily seen, whose noise and buzz, as 
they walked and talked, gave the place the air of an exchange more than of a place for religious 
worship; serving as an outlet for news and gossip of all sorts, as newspapers did not then exist tc 
b<; the carriers of such wares. 

Of his father, Milton says and with a pride which is to his own honor that "he was a man 
of the highest integrity." Later he writes: "I had, from my early years, by the ceaseless dili- 
gence and care of my fat'ier whom God recompense been exercised to the tongues, and some 
sciences, as my age would suffer, by sundry masters and teachers, both at home and at the schools.'" 
And, later still, he says: "My faiher destined me, while yet a little child, for the study of humane 
letters. Both at the grammar school and at home he caused me to be instructed daily."" We 
know also, from other sources, that the elder Milton must have been a man of considerable culture, 
and that he was not only fond of music, but excelled as a composer. Lines harmonized by his 
skill still hold a place in our English psalmody; and one of them might be heard in his time as a 
lullaby on the lips of almost every nurse. 3 Aubrey describes him as "an ingeuiose man; 1 ' and his 
grandson, Philips, records of him, that while assiduous in business, he was not so wedded to it as to 
have denied himself intervals of relaxation and self-improvement. He lived to see a green old age, 
being eighty-four years of age when he died. Concerning the partner of the good man's pilgrimage, 
Milton writes, that "She was a most excellent mother, and known by her charities in the neigh- 
bourhood." 4 



1 Reatont of Church Government, book ii. 

1 Defenrio Secunda. 

' The tunes known as Norwich nod York, Masson's Life of Milton. The fact that Milton wheu writing to his 
father, on plans under consideration between them, should havo sent his thoughts to him in the form of an extended 
piece in Lai.iu verse is evidence enough that the scrivener must have boeu a scholarly person. (See Ad Patrcm, Poemata.) 

4 DrJtrMO 



THE LIFE OF JOHN MILTON. ix 

The minister of the parish in which Bread Street was included, was a man of some mark 
among the Puritan clergy ; and the home of the Miltons was pervaded by a piety of that graver 
type. We have no reason to suppose, however, thai the religious training to which Milton was 
subject, was ever felt by him as irksome or unreasonable. The serious and religions spirt which 
was to become so conspicuous in him in later life, seems to have been characteristic of him from 
his earlier yyars. But his Puritanism through life, and in the home, we doubt not, in which he im- 
bibed it, was not of a narrow and repulsive cast. He always wore his hair long, and, so far, might 
be classed with the Cavaliers rather thai! with the Koundheads. lie grew up a reader of Shake- 
speare, and of all the good poetry accessible to him in his own or in other languages. lie was a 
Puritan ifl so far as Puritanism meant piety and freedom, and no further. 

We have abundant evidence that Milton's capacity began to develop itself very early. We 
know that when not more than ten years of ago the family had come to look upon him as a wonder- 
fully gifted boy, and were astonished as they read the verses even then composed by him. In that 
religious age, nothing could be more natural than that in the purpose of such parents, such a child 
should have been dedicated to the Church. Milton himself relates that such was their intention 
concerning him, and that his own early inclinations tended that way. It was with this view, no 
doubt, that he was sent to St. Paul's Grammar School, then a flourishing foundation, and not more 
than five minutes' walk from his home. 

Milton was about ten years of age when this transition from home tuition to the training of a 
public school took place The spirit in which he prosecuted his studies in his schoolboy days he 
has himself described. Speaking of the "humane letters" to the culture of which his father had 
separated him, ho says, "Which I seized with such eagerness, that from the twelfth year of my 
age I scarcely ever went from my lessons to bed before midnight; which, indeed, was the first 
cause of injury to my eyes, to whose natural weakness there was also added frequent headaches. 
All which not retarding my impetuosity in learning, he caused me to be daily instructed, both at 
the grammar school and under other masters at home; and then when 1 had acquired various 
tongues and also some not insignificant taste for the sweetness of philosophy, he sent me to Cam- 
bridge." ' Aubrey and Philips both attest this much concerning him, and Wood adopts their state- 
ments. So Milton passed from boyhood to youth, and he has borne grateful testimony to the breadth 
and liberality of the encouragements given to his pursuits by his father as he grew in years. The 
following is translated from a Latin poem addressed to his father: "When, at your expense, I had 
obtained access to the eloquence of the tongue of Romulus, and to the delights of Latiuin, and 
the great words becoming the month of Jove, uttered by the magniloquent Greeks, you then advised 
me to add the flowers which are the pride of Gaul, and the speech which the new Italian, attesting 
the barbarian inroads by his diction, pours forth from his degenerate mouth, and the mysteries 
which are spoken by the prophet of Palestine." 8 Happy the youth who had a father to whom it 
became him to make such acknowledgments, and who had a home to look back upon so full of 
grateful memories ! 

In his school experiences, also, Milton appears to have been, upon the whole, foitunate Mr. 
Gill, the head-master of St. Paul's in his time, was a man competent in most respects to his VOIM- 
tion, and he had a son with him as an assistant during a part of Milton's schoolboy days, with 
whom the young poet formed a rather strong friendship. Young Gill, indeed, was hardly the man 



1 Defensio Secunda. ' Ad Patrem. Matron's Milton, p. 67. 



x THE LIFE OF JOHN MILTON. 

we should liavo expected Milton to have sought as a friend. Hi- had nothing of the stately deco- 
rum of the pedagogue about him. Ilia brusque and rash ways did not minister to bis father's 
comfort or to his own; but he was some ten years older than Milton, was a good classic, had 
printed Latin aiid Greek verses, and made his intercourse with the youth from Bread Street so profi- 
table to -him that Milton was constrained to speak of it in after years with much gratitude. Many 
au attempt iu verse, we can suppose, was submitted by him to the judgment of his senior friend, 
and assistance obtained in many a difficulty in his general studies. 

On the 12th of February, 1625, Milton entered Christ's College, Cambridge, as a "lesser pen- 
sioner," which was a middle position between that of a " fellow commoner," who paid the most, 
and that of a "sizer," who paid the least. All received the same education, but the difference in 
payment secured a difference in domestic privileges. The students and officials of Christ's Col- 
lego at that time, when all were assembled, numbered about two hundred and fifty; the students 
iu the university were nearly three thousand: In Christ's College, the most remarkable man was 
Joseph Meade, fellow and tutor, well known to divines by his Clavis Apocalyptica and his studies 
in that direction; and now better known to the students of English history by his letters, full of 
the news and gossip of the hour. Many of those letters have been recently printed. Meado was 
wont to to say freely, " I like to know how the world goes ; " and fortunately for those who came 
within his reach, his genial nature prompted him to communicate readily the intelligence which he 
had been so eager to acquire. He must, in fact, have been the newspaper of his college; and if 
any man there was very ignorant of what was passing in Parliament, Court, or Country, the blame 
must have been his own. Milton, we may be sure, would not have been thus at fault. The next 
man of mark in Christ's College was William Chappell, also fellow and tutor, and, for a time 
Milton's tutor. Chappell could dispute in Latin, after the old scholastic fashion still in vogue, 
with much keenness and readiness. But he was of the school of Laud in ecclesiastical affairs, 
and does not seem to have possessed the sort of power necessary to impress capable and indepen- 
dent minds.' 

Milton's connection with Cambridge extended through seven years, from 1625, when in the 
seventeenth year of his age, to 1632, when in his twenty-third year. In respect to public affairs 
those years were memorable. James 1. had breathed his last. Charles had prosecuted his struggle 
with his Parliament, and had at length resolved on the perilous experiment of attempting to rule 
England without convening any such assemblies. The war with France had been added to the 
war with Spain; and both, after becoming the cause of much disorder and suffering through the 
country, had reached a disgraceful close. The Duke of Buckingham had been cut off by the dag- 
ger of Felton, and the government came to rest iu the hands of Charles and Laud. The names of 
the popular leaders in the Commons the Eliots, the Cokes, and the Seldens, had been ringing in 
the ears of the country, and the harsh treatment to which men of that order were subjected, had 
called forth comments of all kinds, in all places. The stronger men among the Parliamentarians 
muttered their prophesy that affairs would be worse and then better. It was a matter of grateful 
recollection to such men that the Petition of Right had its place on our statute-book, constituting 
as it did a signal landmark in our constitutional history. 

The events of this interval in Cambridge were not of a remarkable description. The election 
of Buckingham to the office of Chancellor, in obedience to the pleasure of the king, filled onc- 



1 Mil ford Masson. Sec many of Meade's fetter*, as published by Ellis; and frequent citations from those in MS. 
in thu third volume of Itetoliitiun* in h'rujliih Ilittvry. 



THE LIFE OF JOHN MILTON. xi 

half of the university with a sense of humiliation, and prompted the other half to acts of svco. 
pliancy which verged not a little upon the ludicrous. Then, some while after, came the installa- 
tion of his Grace, with all the honours and flatteries deemed suitable to the occasion. Subse- 
quently the king and queen favoured the university with their presence, and a hectic flush of 
loyalty attended the event, which deceived no one who could look beneath the surface. 

The course of study while Milton was at Cambridge, was still in process of transition from the 
old middle-age form towards that which has since obtained. The fame of the university in its 
study of mathematics was wholly to come. Not until some thirty years after Milton had left was 
a chair separated to that science. The elements of geometry, indeed, were not entirely over- 
looked, but the first rank was assigned to philology, theology, and philosophy the latter term 
having respect mainly to logic and metaphysics. Lectures were delivered by university pro- 
fessors, which the students of the various colleges were expected, more or less, to attend. The 
tutorial work in each college, though systematically carried on, had not then superseded the uni- 
versity professor, as in later times. In every college the students were separated into sections, 
and were placed in connection with different tutors. The comparative merits of the students was 
ascertained, not by the kind of examination now usual, but by the set disputations carried on in 
Latin in the college chapel. Such disputations, coming to the turn of each man but rarely, to- 
gether with readings with the tutor, and private reading, made up the routine from which a univer- 
sity education was to be realised. 1 

We should conclude, without any direct testimony on the subject, that Milton acquitted him- 
self creditably in his class with his tutors, that he took his full share in the chapel disputations, 
and that he was not negligent of private reading. We know more, however, from authentic 
sources, on this subject, than we should have felt at liberty to suppose, apart from such evidence. 
His nephew Philips says, that " for the extraordinary wit* and reading he had shown in his per- 
formances to attain his degree," he was " loved and admired by the whole university, particularly 
by the fellows, and the most ingenious persons of his house." Aubrey states that " he was a very 
hard student in the university, and performed all the exercises there with very great applause." 
Wood is still more emphatic, stating that as during his school-days, three years before, so at col- 
lege, " 'twas usual with him to sit up till midnight at his book, which was the first thing that 
brought his eyes into the danger of blindness; " that " he profited exceedingly by his indefatigable 
study, and performed his collegiate and academical exercises to the admiration of all, and was 
accounted to be a virtuous and sober person, yet not to be ignorant of his own parts.' 1 In 1642, one 
of his assailants described him as having spent a riotous youth at the university, and as having 
been at length "vomited thence." To which Milton replies, "for which commodious lie, that he 
may be encouraged in the trade another time, T thank him; for it has given me an apt occasion to 
acknowledge publicly, with all grateful mind, that more than ordinary respect which I found, 
above any of my equals, at the hands of those courteous and learned men, the fellows of that 
college wherein I spent some years, who, at my parting, after I had taken two degrees, as the man- 
ner is, signified, in many ways, how much better it would content them that I should.stay, as l>y 
many letters, full of kindness and loving respects, both before that time and long atter, I was 
assured of their singular good affection towards me 5 It should be borne in mind that these state- 



1 Mti8oiTs Life of Milton. 
* This word was used at the time iu the srnse of rnpncity or penius. ' Apology for Smcctymnuvs. 



xii THE LIFE 01' .IOI1N MILTON. 

merits were published within ten years after his leaving Cambridge, when the men who might have 
refuted them, had they been untrue, were most of them living. 

The time was to come in which Milton was to side publicly with the Parliament, and to plead 
for great changes iu Church and State, not sparing the universities. When that time came, noth- 
ing would be more natural than that his opponents should go back to his university life; and if that 
season, so rarely faultless in the case of any man, could be made to yield any bit of scandal, not 
only would the most be made of it, but much more would be grafted upon it. Now it did so hap- 
pen that in Milton's second year a quarrel took place between him and his tutor, Chappell, and Dr. 
Bainbridge, the master, was obliged to interfere. The result, it seems, was, Milton was required to 
absent himself for a season, or that he chose to do so. But the absence was not long. It occurred 
in the Lent term of 162(5, and it did not occasion the loss of a term. When Milton returned, 
another person, named Tovey, became his tutor. 

But OH theae facts something more has been grounded. Dr. Johnson, with the temper charac- 
teristic of his whole criticism on Milton, says, " There is reason to believe that Milton was re- 
garded in his college with no great fondness. That he obtained no fellowship is certain; but the 
unkindnesb with which he was treated was not merely negative. 1 am ashamed to relate what I 
fear is true, that Milton was one of the last students iu either university that suffered the public 
indignity of corporal punishment." Now, we have seen that nothing could be more untrue than 
the first part of this assumption viz., that Milton experienced a general unfriendliness from the 
men of his college; and the other insinuation, which points to a special indignity inflicted upon 
him, is, iu our judgment, equally without foundation. The only apparent evidence in support of 
this imputation is iu one of Aubrey's manuscripts. Writing on the authority of Christopher 
Milton, Aubrey says that Milton received "some unkindness" from the hands of Chappell; and over 
the word "unkindness," the words "whipt him," are subsequently interlined. Whence this later 
account comes no one knows. Beyond a doubt, punishment in that degrading form was still admin- 
istered both in Cambridge and in Oxford, but much less frequently than in former times, and 
rarely ever in the case of youths not under sixteen. But in the spring of 1626 Milton was in his 
eighteenth year ! Looking at the case altogether, we are satisfied that we have here one of the 
many inventions which were flung at a writer who had dared to assail, and with a bold hand, the 
prejudices and the selfish passions of the generation about him. 1 

We have abundant evidence that the early life of Milton, while free from any affectation of 
purity or goodness, as from affectations of all kinds, was a life of seriousness, and of chastitv in a 
high sense of that word. But his seriousness was a manly seriousness; it had no tincture of 
gloom, nothing of narrowness. His chastity, too, was not only a fact, but a t'.n-l, sustained, in his 



' "Dr. Johnson, who was meanly- anxious to revive this slander against Milton, as well as some others, had 
suppose! Milton himself to have this flagellation in his mind, an<l indirectly to confess it, in one of his Latin poems, 
win-re, H|M':iking of Cambridge, and declaring that he no longer had any pleasure iu the thought of re-visiting that 
university, he says 

'Nee dnri libet usque minus prrferrc magistris, 
Cseternque ingenio non Bubnenda moo.' 

This last line the malicious critic would translate 'And other things insufferable to a man of my temper.' But in- 
i- niuin is |>ro|icrly expressive of the intelleftnnl constitution, whilst it is the moral constitution that suffers degredation 
from personal chastisement the sense of honor, of personal dignity, of justice, &c. Indoles is the proper term for 
this latter idea, and in using the word ingenlum there cannot be a doubt that Milton alluded to the dry scholastic 
disputations, which were shocking and odious to his fine poetical genius. If, therefore, the vile story is still to be 
kept up in order to dishonor a great man, at any rale let it not in future be pietendcd that any countenance to such a 
slander can be drawn from the confessions of the poet himself." De Quiucey, Wurh, xv. 317, 318; Masson's Life oj 
Mi'tun. 



Till: LIKi; OF JOHN M.LTON. xiii 

case, by views which even pure men might regard as too ideal and mystical to be adapted t<> a 
world like ours In his estimation, failure in that virtue was more culpable in man than in 
woman, as betraying weakness in the nature that should bo the stronger and the nobler. His lines 
on llobson the carrier show that he was not without his seasons of playful humour; and his letter 
to his iVii'nd Dioilat i, in the spring of ItiJU, shows that while in London he sometimes went to see 
what was doing in the theatres. At a later time, indeed, being accused by some of his clerical 
opponents of writing like a person who had beeu too familiar with the play-house, he deemed it 
well to bid his censors look at home, in the following terms: " lint since there is such necessity 
in the hearsay of a tira, a periwig, or a vizard, that plays must have been seen, what difficulty 
was there in that, when, in the college, so many of the young divines, and those of next aptitude 
to divinity, have been seen so often upon the stage, writhing and unboning their clerical limbs to 
sill the antic and dishonest gestures of Trinculoes, buffoons, and bawds, prostituting the shame of 
that ministry, which either they had, or were nigh having, to the eyes of the courtiers and court 
ladies, with their grooms and mademoiselles? There, while they acted and over-acted, among 
other young scholars, I was a spectator: they thought themselves gallant men, and I thought them 
fools; they made sport, and I laughed; they mispronounced, and I misliked; and to makeup the 
Atticism, they were out, and I hissed." 1 Tne reference here seems to be, to the great perform- 
ance before the king and queen in Cambridge in 1629. The description indicates the kind of taste 
which Milton would have exacted from the drama; and it gives us a glimpse of the young Milton 
of Christ's, as he joins, " with other young scholars," in showing his contempt of the blundering 
performance, until, at last, he hisses them outright. 

In fact, though Milton declined the priestly function in the English Church, he was not, in his 
own conception, the less a priest on that account. The priesthood to which he aspired was the 
bardic priesthood. The inspiration he sought was that which had come upon the old prophets 
an inspiration which might come upon them as laymen, but which raised them to a level with the 
most sacred themes. In his apprehension, a poet of the order which he hoped to become, should 
be, must be, a consecrated man. The singer of Bacchanalian songs may be himself Bacchanalian; 
but a poet who would ascend to things celestial must not be of the earth, earthy. The evil insep- 
arable from our nature may qualify him to depict evil; but if he is to make men feel how awful 
goodness is, he must have striven hard towards those higher regions of being where goodness 
rules. In all art, the truly religious element must come from religious men. Genius without 
sanctity may touch the ark, but it will be but to profane it. However much at home in other 
regions, if the special faculty for this region be wanting, success will be wanting. In art as in 
religion, the natural man does not discern spiritual things 

The current doctrine is, that men of poetical and artistical power will always be very much 
the creatures of imagination and sensibility, and, in consequence, will be subject to alternations of 
elevation or depression in the most capricious forms even their morals and religion being subject 
to these laws in their nature, or, rather, to this absence of law. The life of Milton is not the only 
life of its class which belies this foolish and mischievous doctrine. He not only felt its fallacy, 
but that feeling became a profound conviction, governing his whole life. By reflection on this 
matter, he writes, " I was confirmed in this opinion, that he who would not be frustrate of his hope 
to write well hereafter in laudable things, ought himself to be a true poem -that is, a compo- 
sition and pattern of the best and honourablest things; not presuming to sing high praises 

"' Xnt<?t:lin:iUU. 



xiv THE LIKK OF JOHN MILTON. 

of heroic men or famous cities, unless lie have in himself the experience and the practice of all 
that is praiseworthy." ' 

What marvel if a young mind in Cambridge, with thoughts of this nature struggling to get 
form and fixedness, should have beeu to a great extent, a inhul dwelling apart? What marvel 
if such a youth is found to lament the all but total absence of persons with conceptions or 
sympathies at all of this order among those who were about him?" That the collapse and reserve 
following from such a sense of isolation should have been construed as the evidence of a haughty 
temper, and of undue self-esteem, was no more than might have been expected. In some con- 
nections, to make men enemies, you have only to allow them to suspect that you deem them 
inferiors. It is clear that from these causes Milton suffered during the early days of his college 
course. Something of haughtiness there probably was in his manner, but much that had that 
appearance came from another source. His self-esteem, too, was considerable; but it was calm, 
intelligent, and such as his intelligence would not have allowed him to throw off, even if lie had 
endeavoured to do so. His superiority was a fact, and it would have been affectation in him to 
have seemed to be unconscious of it. Every one has heard that from his fair complexion, and the 
beauty of his features, he sometimes went l>y the name of the "lady of Christ's." But it was 
well known that he was a good swordsman; and Wood says, " His deportment was affable, his gait 
erect and manly, bespeaking courage and undauntedness. " 

Milton must have commenced the study of Hebrew when very young. The earliest poetry 
that has reached us from his pen consists of his paraphrases on the 114th and 136th Psalms. 
Those attempts, he tells us, were made in his fifteenth year. There is a stately and vigorous tone 
in them of the kind which was to be characteristic of his later writings. His next poetical com- 
position known to us dates nearly a year after his connection with Cambridge. It is a poem 
entitled "On the Death of a Fair Infant " The infant was the child of his sister Philips. The 
verses exhibit a rich play of fancy, and are full of conceptions and expressions which only a true 
poet would have been able to command. The " Vacation Exercise," which stands next in order, 
was written some twelve months later, and is chiefly interesting as showing how the young poet 
could manipulate the dry logic of the schools, when disposed to exercise his skill on such 
subjects. The hymn which followed, " On the Morning of Christ's Nativity," is of another order. 
It is a glorious utterance, worthy of its subject. In tlu, judgment of Mr. Hallam, it may, perhaps, 
be said to be the most beautiful hymn in our language. It was produced for the Christinas of 
1029. Immediately afterwards the pieces on the " Circumcision " and the " Passion " were written ; 
but at the eighth verso of the piece last named, the poet stayed his hand, and at a later time 
subjoined the following statement of his reason for so doing: " This subject the author finding 
to be alM)ve the years he then had when he wrote it, and nothing satisfied with what was begun, 
left unfinished" Critics have regarded this judgment as a sound one. His sixteen lines "On 
.Shakespeare " are supposed to have been written on a blank leaf of a copy of the works of the 
great dramatist, probably on a copy of the first folio edition. Iii 1632 wo find them, with other 



1 Ajtologyfar Smeetymnu'ii. 

* H is thus he writes after nbout two years' residence in college: ' Truly among us here, as far as I know, there 
arc hardly one or two, here and there, who do not fly off unfeathered in theology, while all but rude and uneduc-ted 
in philology, as w,.|l an in philosophy, content to lightly pick upas much theology as may suffice for anyhow slicking 

:licr n little sermon, and stitching it over with worn rugs fro:n other quarters." Letter to Alexander <?'//!, July 2, 
1 12S ; Mnsson'8 Life of Mi,t<i, KV4-.'). Tlii.q discontent with the men, and a discontent, no less marked, with the 
routine of the pluee, was not .1 mood likely to mnke many friends; yet who can wonder at the feeling f 



THE LIFE OP JOHN MILTON. 



xv 



verses of the same kind, prefixed to tbe second edition of that collection, but they are printed 
anonymously. The fact, however, of their appearing there is interesting, from their being the 
first lines of Milton that, so far as we know, had then found their way into print at all. The piece, 
from about the same time, on listening to " Solemn Music," is quite Miltonic in its cast: 

That undisturbed song of pure content, 

Aye sung before the saphire-coloured throne, 

To Him who sits thereon, 

With saintly ghout and solemn jubilee: 

Where the bright seraphinis in burniug row, 

And the cherub host in thousand quires, 

Touch their immortal harps of golden wires, 

With those just saints that wear victorious palms, 

Hymns devout and huh psalms, 

Sing everlastingly. 

The Marchioness of Winchester was a lady of great beauty, beloved for her benevolence, and 
reverenced for her extraordinary endowments. An inflammation, which passed from her face to 
her throat, carried her off almost suddenly, and while in a state of pregnancy. Her death was 
widely and deeply deplored, and called forth poetical tributes to her memory from Ben Jonson, 
Davenant, and some other well-known names. Milton also brought his lament, under the title of 
" An Epitaph on the Marchioness of Winchester." Of this production it will be enough to say, 
that the young poet of Christ's did not suffer from being brought into comparison on this occasion 
with the veterans in his art. We only need direct the attention of the reader to the sonnet on 
his reaching "The ago of twenty-three," to his lines on "Time," and to those on Hohson, the 
" University Carrier," to complete our account of the known English poetry of Milton during his 
seven years of residence at Cambridge. 

But Milton's poetry in Latin during his student years was not inconsiderable. No fragment 
of it, however, passed into print during that period; and it has been generally accepted as 
evidence of his scholarship, rather than as presenting a fitting vehicle for the action of his genius 
as a poet. 

If Milton was dissatisfied with the aids to culture which he found in Cambridge, it should be 
remembered that Gibbon was much mofe dissatisfied with Oxford on that ground a century later, 
and a man like the poet Wordsworth may be found expressing himself somewhat after the same 
manner even in our time. But the truth is, in the best colleges and in the best times, the man 
who gets no more education than tutorial oversight and help may secure to him will get very 
little. Milton, no doubt, owed something to his tutor Tovey; but more, immensely more, to that 
wider tutoring of society and of books which gave its influence to the voluntary action of his 
nature. The things which grow in the soul are things more or less native to it. To educate the 
mind is to draw out its power, and the power must be there, or it cannot be educed. All gifted 
minds have been conscious of this fact. It was thus eminently with the man who was to become 
the author of " Paradise Lost." 

Milton did not seem to be in haste to decide on his walk in life. His course was so appar- 
ently aimless, down even to the last year of his time in Cambridge, that a friend, to whose 
judgment he owed some deference, appears to have expostulated with him on that ground. In a 
carefully-written letter he attempts to vindicate himself. He denies being governed by a mere 
love of learning. W r ere he influenced by no stronger motive, there were considerations, such as 
the desire of " home and family,'' or of " honour and repute," that, would soon overpower that mo. 
tive. But the love of learning being good in itself, may beget such a reverence of what should be 



xvi THE LIFK OF JOHN MILTON. 

done with it as to dispose a man to hazard the charge of being late in the field, rather than incur 
the reproach of appearing there not duly eqnipt. He then transcribes for his friend the sonnet he 
had written, when arrived at the age of twenty -three, as evidence that he had not been without thought 
on this subject. The friend so addressed evidently hoped to see him a parish priest. Milton does 
not express, on this occasion, any conscientious objection to becoming a clergyman as a Cam- 
bridge student, and as Cambridge was then governed, it was not likely that he would do so. We 
have good reason to think that he felt scruples on that point even then. But he had enough to 
urge in self-defence, without touching upon matters which Laud and his instruments were doing 
their best to punish as crimes. Ten years later he had cast aside all such reticence. He then 
says, as we have seen, that by his parents and friends he was destined, "of a child," to the church, 
and that his own inclination tended that way, " till coming to some maturity of years, and perceiv- 
ing what tyranny had invaded the church," he saw clearly " that he who would take orders must 
subscribe slave, and take an oath witaal, which unless he took with a conscience that would retch, 
he must straight perjure himself, or split his faith." He thought it good, therefore, "to prefer a 
blameless silence, before the sacred office of speaking, bought and began with servitude and for- 
swearing." He speaks of himself, accordingly, as a man " Church-ousted by the prelates," and as 
possessing a right, in return to criticise both the church and her rulers.' 

Milton, we have reason to think, had his moments in which ho thought of giving himself to the 
law. But his writings in prose and verse, before leaving Cambridge, gave his friends the impres- 
sion that he had a vocation to write poetry that would live; and such was, no doubt, the dream of 
his own spirit, when in his higher moods. To this idea he endeavoured, by degrees, to reconcile the 
more conventional sagacity of his worthy father. Ho reminded him of his own passion for music 
what marvel if the son of such a father should have a passion for poetry ? It was painful for him 
to disappoint the hopes of one so well entitled to his reverence and affection; but in his estima- 
tion, the silver mines of Peru were of small value compared with the power to produce immortal 
verse. His father, in his generous wisdom, had aided him in realising capacity and passion in that 
form, and must bear with him in obeying this current of his nature.' In this mood Milton left 
Cambridge. 

By that time the scrivener had relinquished business, and had settled in the village of Horton, 
in Buckinghamshire, with the intention, apparently, of passing the evening of his days in that 
retreat. How it went with the son in the next five years of his life, ho has himself stated in few 
words. "At my father's country residence," he says, " whither he had retired to pass his old age, 
I, with every advantage of leisure, spent a complete holiday in turning over the Greek and Latin 
writers; not but that sometimes I exchanged the country for the town, either for the purpose of 
buying books or for that of learning something new in mathematics or in music, in which sciences 
I then delighted." During those five years Milton wrote his sonnet on the Nightingale, the Allegro 
and Pknseroto, the Arcade* and Comus, and Lycidas. The Nightingale is founded on the bit of rural 
credulity which supposed that to hear the note of that bird in spring before the cuckoo was a sign 
of success in love. Concerning the Allegro and Penseroso, we only need repeat that they have their 
place in the first rank of our idyllic; poetry. The Arcades is an incomplete production ; the omitted 
portion was probably in prose. Harefield, the seat of that distinguished lady, the Countess Dow- 
ager of Derby, where this dramatic poem was presented, was only a few miles distant from Hor- 
ton. But we have no reason to suppose that Milton was known to the family. It is probable that 



' T)u Reaton of Self- Government. ' Ad Patron. . D e / mt io Securxla. 



O LIFK OF JOHN MILTON. xvii 

tlie lines were written at tlio request of liis musical friend, Henry Lawes. To a request from that 
quarter we no doubt owe the origin of Cvmus, of which we shall speak elsewhere. 

It was during his residence at Hortou that Miltou was incorporated as a member of the 
University of Oxford. In those days, the standing of a scholar in one university might thus 
give him a place in the other. Oxford was much more accessible from Hortou than Cambridge. 

It was at Hortou, too, and iu this interval, that Milton lost "his most excellent mother." She 
lies buried in the chancel of the parish church. By the side of that grave Milton must have 
stood, and have shed his tear with his mourning father, his sister, and his brother, as they listened 
to the earth falling on that coffin, and looked their last look into that narrow house to which all 
come in their allotted time. 

It was also towards the close of these five years at Horton, that Edward King, of Christ's 
College, the friend of Milton, psrished in the St. George's Channel, an event which called forth 
from the poet the monody under the name of Lycidus. The gifted man whose life thus closed 
in the twenty-fifth year of his age, was looking towards the ministry of the church; and Milton 
glances at this fact so as to indicate, as clearly as was then safe, his own malcontent feeling in 
relation to the ecclesiastical establishment, and his expectation of a coming retribution in that 
quarter. When this monody was reprinted, in 1645, the author could dare to proclaim his whole 
meaning, and ho accordingly placed the following sentence at the head of the poem: "In this 
monody, the author bewails a lost friend, unfortunately drowned in his passage from Chester, in 
the Irish seas, 1037; and by occasion foretels the ruin of our corrupted clergy, then in their heiyht. n 
But an interval was still to pass before this prophesy would be realized. 

We have two letters written by Miltou about this time, to his friend Diodati, which give us 
some insight into his habits and inner life. Tie assures his friend that he is a slow man in letter- 
writing. Another cause of his seeming negligence as a correspondent consisted in his inability to 
mingle work and play. In his case, generally, to be committed to a thing was to be committed 
to it without interruption until done, or until he should come to some natural resting-place. In 
some respects he will not venture to say what God may or may not have conferred upon him; but 
one gift, at least, has been instilled into him viz., a fervent love of the beautiful, and a passion to 
seek it wherever it may be found. To a commerce with such things he must aspire ; and if he 
should not do so with a success commensurate with his hopes, his next effort should be to do fitting 
homage to those who have been more fortunate. Ho confesses that in this spirit he is pluming 
his wings, moving slowly, but, as he hopes, wisely. It must not be supposed, however, that he 
has no thought of the practical. Far from it. He has some notion of taking chambers iu one of 
the Inns of Court; and thinkait would be pleasant to see his friends there, and to saunter with 
them, on summer evenings, in the neighbouring walks. 1 

We have no reason to suppose that this last thought was ever acted upon. Another idea 
took much stronger possession of his mind about this time. His studies had filled his imagina- 
tion with visions of the past, associated with the Alps, the land of the Apennines, and the regions 
beyond. How natural that he shohld wish to traverse those countries, to tread the old pathways 
in their ancient cities, and to gaze on the monumental wonders stilt to be seen there. The failing 
health of his mother may have constrained him to check this desire hitherto; and the fact that 
since her decease his brother Christopher had married, and had come to reside with Lis father, 



Masson's ITUton, pp. 597-601. 



rviii THE L1FK OF JOHN MILTON. 

may liave seemed to say that the fitting time had now come. The cost of his project would be 
considerable, as it was his intention to travel as u gentleman, with his own servant. His affec- 
tionate lather, we may suppose, felt less hesitation on that ground than on some others. But his 
consent was given, and in May, 1<>38, Milton crossed the channel, on his way to Paris. He had 
been careful to obtain good introductions. One of these came from his distinguished neighbour, 
Sir Henrv Wotton, Provost of Eton. The provost had lately become possessed of a copy of 
Comus, as printed by Henry Lawes, which had delighted him greatly. He had also conversed 
on some occasion with the author, and assures him that the pleasure of that interview was such as 
to have led him to hope for a renewal of the " draught," by inviting him to " a poor meal or two," 
when they " might have banded together some good authors." The following is the postscript to 
an epistle from the courteous old provost: " Sir, I have expressly sent this my footboy to 
prevent your departure without some acknowledgment from me of the receipt of your obliging 
letter, having myself, through some business, I know not how neglected the ordinary conveyance. 
In any part where I shall understand you lixed, I shall be glad and diligent to entertain yon with 
home novelties; ever for some fomentation of our friendship, too soon interrupted in the cradle." ' 

On his arrival at Paris, one of Milton's introductions secured him the friendly notice of Lord 
Scudamore, the English ambassador; and through his lordship's personal courtesy the young 
Englishman was introduced to the learned Hugo Grotius, then ambassador from the Queen of 
Sweden to the French Cjurt. We know nothing of what passed at this interview, except that 
Grotius is said to have taken " the visit kindly," and to have given his visitor " entertainment 
suitable to his worth and the high commendations he had heard of him." But Grotius was much 
occupied at that time with a dream about strengthening Protestantism by uniting the Episco- 
palian Churches of that faith in England, Sweden, Denmark, Norway and passing by all other 
Protestants. If this sorry project was broached to Milton, his response, we may be sure, would 
not be of a very agreeable description. 

Milton's stay in Paris was for a few days only. From Paris he journeyed to Nice; thence he 
sailed to Genoa, and thence to Leghorn. From Leghorn his route was through Pisa to Florence. 
In the latter city he remained two months. Florence was then, as it has been for centuries, the 
groat seat of Italian culture. Almost every street had its academy or club, consisting of the vol- 
untary associations of scholars, poets, artists, and men of science. By the help of introductions 
obtained in England or Paris, Milton was readily admitted into some of the most distinguished of 
these fraternities. To the enjoyment of this privilege it was necessary that some composition 
from his pen should bo produced, and this condition was complied with by presenting some of the 
things written by him while at Cambridge, or others written for the purpose. Being able to 
speak both Latin and Italian with correctness and fluency, he was at once on a level with his new 
friends; and great, it would seem, was the pleasure he found in such meetings. \Ylien nobly 
pleading, at a later time, for the liberty of the press, he says: "I would recount what I have seen 
and heard in other countries where this kind of inquisition tyranises; where I have sat among 
their learned men for this honour I had and been counted happy to be born in such a place of 
philosophic freedom as they supposed England was, while themselves did nothing but bemoan the 
servile condition into which learning amongst them was brought; that this was it which had 
damped the glory of Italian wits; that nothing had been there written, now these many years, but 
flattery and fustian." In the company of persons of this order, Milton was admitted to the 



Wottoniana. Printed also by Milton, in his edition of Comvi, in 1645. ' Philips. 



THE LIFE OF JOHN MILTON. 



xix 



presence and discourse of the great philosopher of the ago. "There," he says, "it was that I 
found and visited the famous Galileo, grown old, a prisoner to the Inquisition, for thinking in 
astronomy otherwise than the Franciscan and Dominican licensers thought." Milton and (ialileo 
face to face ! And Galileo in the state to which the younger man now gazing upon him will 
come in darkness, blind ! But, for the present, Milton enjoys the light the light of the Italian 
sky, and, when day has fled, the light which gives so much brilliancy to those learned gatherings, 
and to the higher circles of Florence. For.it is evident that to the latter Milton had admission, 
and that his heart, guarded as it might be, was not wholly proof against impression from the 
beauty to be seen in those circles. Pieces written liv him in Florence will be found among his 
poems, and verses composed there in his praise have come down to us verses which, if they do 
not show great genius in the writers, show clearly enough how unusual must have been the admi- 
ration awakened by the genius of Milton. From Florence Milton to